---
layout: post
title: A Theoretical Analysis of ‘Spaciness’ (And Potential Solutions)
---

Healthy introspection is a valuable process for me. I think that my underlying inclination towards introspection stems from the following set of beliefs:

+	Thought processes (even complex ones) can be understood.
+	This understanding comes through one’s willingness and ability to understand and sift through patterns.
+	Once these patterns are understood, the mind itself can be understood, in both the self and in others.
+	Once the mind is understood, we can leverage what we do not yet currently know about existing dynamic systems (particularly biological ones) in order to solve real-world problems in ways that are, by proxy, ahead of their time.
+	By solving these problems in ways that are ahead of their time, we can achieve a better world for humanity during the ephemeral time period that humanity exists.

Point #3 is due to the fortunate circumstance of inter-subjective similarity – namely, that people are far more similar than they are different -- and that neurologically region-specific variations and nuances do not dissuade from this overarching similarity. In fact, we rely on these similarities in order to make informed people-based decisions, because we are fundamentally under the assumption that people are similar in their patterns and inner complexities. The field of psychology relies on this in order to be a scientifically validated field, much like any scientifically valid field relies on some semblance of shared structure (which we call ‘proven facts’).

Point #4 is due to the fact that biological systems tend to mirror each other in seemingly surprising ways. This is necessary for us to make analogies between systems. When we compare countries to companies, the individual to the collective, or the cell to a powerhouse, we rely on the assumption that these organic systems have overarching similarities that can be observed and exploited. This leads to what is traditionally called “prediction”, but (in more concrete terms) is simply one’s ability to decode a pattern in the system of interest and observe the implications of that pattern within the world at large. This is also valuable to fields such as philosophy, if not only because philosophy is essentially what exists before we shove it into our pile of “confirmed facts” (also known as ‘science’). <sup>[1]</sup>

That being said, my system of interest is the mind itself. I call it my ‘pivot point’. Everything I learn – no matter what it is – is immediately parsed through its own feedforward network for relevant information to feed my ‘pivot point’. For this reason, I am able to notice relationships (patterns) between globally related objects fairly quickly, as long as they seem valuable to my running framework of the human mind. Also for this reason, I have difficulties focusing on topics that are unrelated to my ‘pivot point’, such as pure mathematics.

I am very spacey in the real world, according to my friends and family. There are two kinds of ‘spacey’ that I am most familiar with in myself. The first is the spaciness that comes from socializing (in which I am trying hard to accommodate the emotions of the person I am with, much like a musician might accommodate an instrument to produce the most delectable sound in that context). This requires a constant update on the emotional homeostasis of the environment, which takes up a frustrating amount of cognitive attention. If I am trying to reason through a critical thinking problem, for example, I cannot easily do so while socializing. I am too aware of boring the other person, making them uncomfortable with long pauses, or presenting myself in such a way that they feel happy to be having this discussion in the first place. If someone is explaining a hard problem to me that is not relevant to my ‘pivot point’ (and, in addition, appears to be very important to them), I will spend most of my cognitive effort on appearing to look interested, in thinking of more questions to ask them, and in considering ways to incorporate other people in the group in the conversation. Regrettably, I often miss the crux of what they are saying by engaging in this process. But this is why I think that socialization is often given an anti-intellectual rap. It is not that it isn’t an intellectual process, it is just that it is a process that is divorced from the content of the conversation at times, and if the content of the conversation is of a highly technical matter, it is easy to appear ‘spacey’, ignorant, and unintellectual.

The social spaciness has a very strong basis in ‘feeling’ out the situation, and responding to it accordingly – much like the musician analogy, or even an athlete playing a sport. An athlete must engage with the world based on feeling tones – not emotional ones, but pattern-recognition ones. <sup>[2]</sup>

This pattern-recognition element is present in the second kind of spaciness: the consequences of inattention. This lends itself back to the ‘pivot point’ I mentioned earlier. If something is not immediately applicable to my interests, it is hard for me to learn it without engaging in conscious-based thought activity. However, as most of my greatest insights come from a parallel processing and parsing of topics that pertain to my ‘pivot point’, I am reluctant to take that conscious control over my thoughts and actions. This can be overcome with a bit of training. But first, it is important to understand what is going on under the hood.

As a relevant example, I am right now in the process of building a project for a computer science class using machine learning techniques. As machine learning is not something I am well versed in enough to do in my sleep, this project requires my conscious knowledge of what exactly I am doing. So my process is as follows: first, I gather information from a wide variety of seemingly relevant materials, without necessarily giving myself an agenda. Inevitably, I count on myself to recognize a pattern somewhere – “hey, this looks like a relevant piece of information!” -- and to incorporate that information into my unconscious knowledge of what my project will look like. I believe that global pattern seeking is an unconscious process. It can be rendered conscious, but only once understood well enough to formulate in a sequential manner. And since I do not understand machine learning well enough to formulate what it is I want to do before I have made my decision on what it is that I am doing, I rely on my ability to seek patterns and to contrast them to my association-based memory of images.

This ‘association-based memory of images’ sounds a bit random, but it is actually a very necessary thing. The way it works for most people seems to be as follows: you learn a procedure (presumably in school), you implement it a few times, and then you have a memory of the procedure. Once you are looking at another procedure that is novel and unfamiliar, you can pattern-match the novel procedure to your memory of already-implemented procedures and find the right fit. This allows you to solve the problem.

Now my process is a bit different, and I think that this is where the spaciness comes in. I used to think that I had a bad memory for past procedures, but in actuality I think that my brain is built to ignore sequential information. I try to structure things very sequentially and orderly, and it certainly helps if I can see a linear timeline of information in front of me, but if this information is too far apart (as is often the case when learning algebra in ninth grade and then learning calculus years later), I have to approach the situation anew. If it is something that I can leverage using my ‘pivot point’, I can solve the problem fairly quickly. But as machine learning is not something that relates explicitly to people (and I’m referring to the algorithmic implementations here, not necessarily the concepts behind them), I have to approach the problem afresh and seek patterns within a storehouse of association-based memories, thinking of what each thing reminds me of and then utilizing it based on whether it strikes the right ‘chord’ (my own form of pattern-matching) for the task at hand. I am forced to do this despite having learned the actual procedures before and successfully implementing them, and despite fundamentally understanding them when asked to explain my understanding to others.

For this reason, I require extra time to do well on tests. It isn’t that I don’t ‘know’ the material, it is that I need to reason through everything from the ground-up instead of relying on past information. On one hand, if successfully done, I can find very novel patterns in my reconstructed view of the world. On the other hand, it is clearly very slow to do this, especially when I have a task at hand and constraints on my allotted time.

This is where (I believe) most people would know to engage in the ‘critical thinking’ process. They would ask themselves what exactly is happening, what they need to do, what they don’t understand, how they can understand it, etc. This is an inverse process to the pattern-seeking quest, and so it can be uncomfortable if you are not used to it, much like a musician would feel uncomfortable if they had to constantly ask themselves which chord to play next during a cover of Led Zeppelin’s ‘Free Bird’. However, the idea here is that if you are given a task in which you have not developed a sophisticated pattern-matching method for (as leveraged by a ‘pivot point’), then you are in no position to seek these patterns until you have built a separate model to suit what you are currently working with. Once you have done this, then you can go back on auto-pilot mode and seek patterns to build novel solutions to problems. And it is also worth noting that your current working model of how the world works was once a conscious process, which is why children are always asking ‘Why?’ to an often-irritating degree, and why a musician must learn every chord before they can begin playing their instrument. The things you ask the most questions about inevitably become what you are good at reasoning about, which is why what we are interested in naturally is often what we are good at, and vice versa. So if you are the source of information for a child engaging in this process, you can feel good about yourself knowing that you have helped build a model of potentially-innovative thought in a child. ☺

Another thing to do is to make sure that you have visual representations of abstract concepts in your brain. This is based on an over-reliance on association-based memories instead of procedural-based ones. For example, I find linear algebra hard to do unless I have ‘marinated’ in it long enough to produce a result. However, if I can visualize what a basis looks like and how it logically connects to everything else in the linear algebra world, the entire process becomes a lot more manageable and efficient. If your memory for images is strong and your memory for procedures is weak, then just turn the procedure into an image and there you go. 

Lastly, it is always good to speak out loud with others about what you are trying to do, because it forces you to become conscious in your thinking. Socializing can be a procedural process in its own right. If you do this enough, you can build a model for the problem faster, thus propelling you ever closer toward successful pattern matching in the future.

As for the social spaciness I mentioned above…I don’t know if there’s a cure for that. Socializing is a strange enough process as it is. If you share that same sort of spaciness with me (and many people do, presumably moreso than the spaciness I just finished describing), then I think my solution would be to find a way to stop caring about how other people are feeling all the time. If you find such a solution, let me know.

Footnotes:

+ <sup>[1]</sup> In this way, an unproved yet true philosophy is an ‘unconfirmed science’, whereas an unconfirmed yet inevitably untrue philosophy is ‘hogwash’. Though whether the latter truly exists in practice is something I have yet to ruminate over. Given that thoughts operate in patterns and cycles, do we ever really have thoughts that are simply ‘hogwash’, or from no meaningful basis whatsoever? Are we capable of operating in such a way?
+ <sup>[2]</sup> These are also known as ‘heuristics’, I think. I call them ‘feelings’ because, from my little ‘cerebral tower’, they have the same flavor to me as emotion-based feelings. But I’m also not sure how strong my emotion-based feelings are as a general rule, despite what I typically project outward. So your mileage may vary.
