---
layout: post
title: Review of Straw Dogs - Thoughts on Humans and Other Animals
---

This was my introduction to contemporary political philosophy and liberal critique, and I ended up having mixed feelings about it. In Straw Dogs, John Gray sets out to unmask hypocrisy and irony in the liberal philosophy of ‘humanism’ by tracing its origins back to Christian ideology. He then makes the claim that the human compulsion to ‘act’ in order to ‘make progress’ is simply an illusion, and thus human progress itself is an illusion. He points out that the human ideals of ‘morality’ and ‘sense of self’ are also illusions, and that, by extension, humans are not inherently different from other animals.

Gray begins by pointing out how both ‘religion’ and ‘science’ carry illusory properties that are not too far from each other philosophically. Both science and religion give the human species a fulfilling sense of “progression”, and this sense of progression is clung to in order to feel that life (and action) has meaning.  Furthermore, both fields have a tendency to censor thinkers who “stray too far from current orthodoxies” in order to preserve the comforting illusion of a “single established worldview” (Freud and Lovelock were cited here). The unorthodox thinkers who break into the mold are often the thinkers who carry the most political or rhetorical power (Galileo was cited here). Thus, advancements in science were no more based upon rational thought and the scientific method than were advancements in religion.

Gray further points out the irony in using science to contest religion, when the greatest scientists in history (Galileo, Tycho Brahe, Newton, etc.) viewed their own scientific discoveries as byproducts of a divinely created order. I suppose that this says more about how science is taught nowadays relative to how it was considered back before the scientific method was neutralized to today’s extent. I also think that we are quick to attribute new and profound experiences to divine intervention, but that is a topic for another discussion.

Regardless, I found this portion of the text compelling, and have long accepted the idea that humans rely on something external – a ‘guiding star’ of sorts -- to an almost illusionary standpoint. I had never considered science to be on the same sort of spectrum, but when I thought about it, I found the argument to be compelling. There seems to be a lot of logical fallacy in science that is swept under the rug so that ‘common sense’ can maintain its creative license, and, from an observer’s standpoint, this appears to pop up in fields that consider the scientific nature of reality. Gray cited the ‘many-worlds’ interpretation in physics as proof against the classic logic that the same event cannot happen and not happen. He also cited the alteration of the world by observers to be at the core of quantum mechanics, despite its impossibility on earth; after all, we cannot alter the world by simply observing it, can we? Gray’s assertions are rather blanket-like and cherry-picked to support his point, but I enjoyed mentally toying with them nonetheless.

I think that it may be worth pointing out, however, that if the rules of logic are man-made to suit science as it exists to us, who is to say that this logic cannot bend under circumstances where they are assumed to bend? It seems kind of messy to me that we are expected to accept Gray’s logic here, when it is being used to counteract a logical claim within a logical argument that denounces human logic. My first reaction would be to escape this logic entirely, but I’ve never been great at logic in the first place.

The book carries on to describe a brief history of philosophy of the self and its properties, starting with Schopenhauer, briefly visiting Hume and Kant, and then ending with Nietzsche, Heidegger, and Wittgenstein. The ultimate concurrence among this assortment of philosophers is that we cannot know anything (which was the takeaway from essentially every philosophy class I've ever taken, so this was about as newsworthy to me as the date on the calendar). Some *did* include the ‘self’ into this mix of unknowable things, however, while others didn’t. Kant, for example, believed that the opportunity of choice and ethical principles set the self apart from other things. On the other end, Schopenhauer believed that the self is a dream-like construction with no basis in reality, and that we are driven by nothing but our bodily needs. Heidegger believed that animals merely “exist”, whereas humans are makers of the world(s) that they live in. Wittgeinstein believed that the world was merely a construction of human thought, and that language and thought mirrored the logical structure of the world (though I think that he later retracted this belief). 

In every case, Gray attempts to show how these philosophical ideals were rooted in the basic Christian notion that the human species has any overarching significance. Gray asserts that this notion made its descent from Platonian-style thinking – a style of thinking that, curiously, did not touch Chinese, Indian, or Japanese philosophies. Curiously enough, those philosophies were rooted less in humanism and human significance, and more in living life in a wave-like, peaceful fashion, respecting the other animals with which we live.

Gray goes on to challenge the idea of “self” and its existence, and how we are not free agents, and how cognitive science so nicely supports his assertions. He challenges the human obsession with morality, despite its readiness to disappear when the human life is threatened, or when “progress” is assured (think Nazi Germany in both instances). He also criticized technology as our human symbol of progress, citing it as both progressive and non-progressive (in the instance of mass murder with weaponry), inherently escapist (in the instance of virtual reality), and relatively unnecessary in the sense that it does not ultimately change our needs, yet ends up creating more human vices and distractions as it “progresses”, as well as expanding the distance between the wealthy and the impoverished. During the Stone Age, for example, nobody was malnourished, and everybody had just enough to survive. By today’s standards, the hunter-gatherer lifestyle seems fairly bleak and homeless.

Quite frankly, there was a lot said in this book, and I ended up taking notes on every chapter just so that I could hit all of the key points (many of which were not listed in this review). Otherwise, I probably would have ended up forgetting half of what was said – not because I disagreed with it, but because the book lacked any overarching structure to it. This isn’t necessarily a bad thing, but it can be difficult to summarize or even review the book for this reason.

I will say, however, that while I found a lot of Gray’s insights compelling, I think that this book relied a little bit too much on unsupported, “blanket” assertion. Each chapter was divided into little mini-chapter assertions, some of which were comprised of two meager sentences. For example, this was chapter 5.9: “In evolutionary prehistory, consciousness emerged as a side effect of language. Today it is a by-product of the media.” Flowery verbiage aside, what is a sentence like this supposed to mean?

Furthermore, it is unfair to use uncontested blanket assertion to disregard uncontested modern beliefs. I think that a lot of this kind of philosophy comes down to human ignorance. This book, in particular, relies on our willingness to accept our own ignorance – otherwise the illusions described here would not exist to us. And while I am always ready to discover the ignorance in my previously-held beliefs, there is always a rightful hesitancy in doing so if the assertions are not supported by evidence (heck, even cherry-picked evidence). While the book contains a fair amount of evidence in favor of *certain* points, the chapters often end on a sentence that seems disjoint from the main point of the chapter. This sentence would often consist of flowery jargon, a sort of philosopher’s ‘syntactic sugar’, and would (inevitably) end up distracting me from the main point of the chapter.

Overall, I think that the book ends with an acceptable message: come to understand your illusions, and to understand which ones are necessary evils. I was also impressed by the wealth of history that could be found within this book, though I have no doubt that there is more out there that would refute some of the points made in this book (it wouldn’t make sense if there wasn’t).

Considering that a fair portion of this book was left unstructured and unsupported by the author, I can only assume that his arguments would have been stronger and easier to consume had they been outlined in more detail and throughout an entire series of books. At the very least, the book could have been longer than it was. Despite this, I really enjoyed this book as my introduction to political philosophy, and would wholeheartedly recommend it to anyone who wants to challenge his or her beliefs. At the very least, I know that my motivation to study more of the history and philosophy of science has dramatically increased, and will continue to increase from this point forward.
