---
layout: post
title: How We Engage in the ‘Star Wars’ Mentality, And Why We Shouldn’t
---

The other day, I watched the latest Star Wars movie with my father. It was a very enjoyable, well done movie. I would still recommend it, my forthcoming thoughts notwithstanding.

However, I see the Star Wars franchise as guilty of promoting a mentality that has troublesome implications. Given its status as a pop culture phenomenon, my hope is that I can use it as a framework to expand upon my vision for the world in a way that is (hopefully) useful and relevant.

##The premise.
The Star Wars ‘formula’ is as follows: first, you throw your audience into a world in which there are two sides that are fundamentally incompatible with each other. Remove all doubt and constraints as to which side is ‘good’ (the Light Side) and which side is ‘bad’ (the Dark Side) by making the latter side do everything for unarguably immoral reasons, typically pertaining to a self-serving amassing of power. On the other side, everything must be done for unarguably good reasons, such as the altruistic drive to protect the unfortunate, or one’s own family in the name of love. Those who oppose the Dark Side do so because they know it is the ‘right thing to do’, despite it being the difficult thing to do. Those who join the Dark Side are presumably too afraid of the instability that comes with fighting with the good team, or perhaps they find the power-hungry stance of the bad team compelling. Either way, both sides breed distinct, classifiable characters.

This is a winning formula because it provides no cognitive dissonance. After all, it is never unclear that rooting for the ‘Light Side’ is the morally correct to make. There is no need for further analysis on the matter, and so one can sit back, relax, and imagine what it would be like to live in the shoes of the heroes, fighting passionately for wholeheartedly noble causes. In so doing, you’ve romanticized the idea of war, bravery, and the ability to do what’s right. You’ve been drawn to the idea of fighting for a just cause and being a worldly hero.

This idea lends itself to our admiration of our veterans. The idea that we have people risking their lives so that we can keep our country. The idea that risking ones’ life to do the ‘right thing’ is what keeps our country so powerful, so morally strong, and so unified. 

This idea is what lends itself to tradition, to remaining loyal to what our forefathers would have wanted for us – we see them as the ‘Light Side’, the noble forerunners who did what they could to protect us and unify us.

It lends itself to activism. We have people out there who crusade against rape, against anti-feminism, against a multitude of things that the world would justifiably be seen as much better without.

These things are important. We see them as ‘good’. The way we go about doing them, however, is often unproductive.

##The problem.
In Star Wars, there is no timeout for analysis. In fact, war itself is fundamentally against analysis. When the bad team attacks, you attack back. It is reactionary, and if you question it, you risk losing your life. In Star Wars, you can do this because you understand that fighting for the good team is always the right thing to do, and that if the bad team were gone, all would be right in the world. Star Wars is careful not to contradict this notion.

In real life, wars are not fought like this. Wars are made up of people who have deeply-rooted beliefs in the value of their own country, their own religions, and their own people. They see other countries as infringing upon what they believe is important. Their country bands together and rebels against this infringement, thus engaging in some sort of self-reinforcing cycle that justice is theirs for the taking, and that they are doing the right thing for the sake of their country. 

In reality, however, these wars are fought against people with the same exact stance on their own countries and beliefs. In this way, country-wide war is nothing more than a country of ‘good people’ fighting against another country of ‘good people’. There is bravery in this, yes, but it is bravery at the expense of analysis.

In this way, veterans hold similar values and mentalities to the average activist. In the heart of an activist boils a desire to be a crusader for justice, to be doing the ‘right thing’ for the sake of the mistreated – your own brothers and sisters, your own flesh and blood. Similar to the pace of Star Wars, such a desire (amidst its noble intentions) could easily lend itself to a split-second, non-analysis-based reaction towards fighting for the good team, when in fact, there is no ‘bad team’ to begin with. In crusading for a cause, you are not crusading against ‘bad’ people --  you are crusading against deep-seated beliefs of people who think themselves to be good. 

Take, for example, those who oppose homosexuality. They often do so not to cause harm or strip the power of those who identify as homosexual; more often than not, they see homosexuality as a sin against God. In fact, their opposition may very well be grounds for their own deep-seated cognitive dissonance. On one hand, most people genuinely want to see people be happy with whomever they want to be happy with. On the other hand, they see God’s word as the universal manifestation of morality. For this reason, they may see homosexuality as negative under the hood, similar to how an addictive drug may cultivate happiness in an adolescent but then inevitably lead to trouble. If this is the nature of the belief, then they will not be convinced by argumentation, or by ‘love is love’ as a stock phrase. They are also not to be blamed for this, as they are no worse than you for fighting against anti-homosexuality in the name of your own brand of morality. Activism, like religion, serve as tools for navigating right and wrong – by relying on one over the other, you are no different from the country of ‘good people’ fighting a war against another country of ‘good people’.

Much as you don’t grow up in a Catholic family without believing in Catholicism, you don’t grow up with Americans without believing in American values. You don’t look to other belief systems and say ‘they are right; more right than I am.’ Why should you? Beliefs taste better without the cognitive dissonance, much like Star Wars is made more enjoyable without analysis. You can look at other countries, other methodologies, and other lifestyles, but you will tend to see the faults, and this reinforces your own belief in your own values. And this feels a lot better than looking at yourself and considering the faults in your own methodology of thought.

As a college student myself, I often see college students who think that they are above this. Unfortunately, they are not; nor can they be if they continue to be college students. As an example, consider the level of intellectual diversity in modern day Universities – or, rather, its [Democratic saturation]( http://dailycaller.com/2015/12/22/25-years-of-democratic-contributions-expose-narrow-minded-us-colleges/). Compare this to the nearly even political split of the American population. This creates two non-obvious yet very disastrous problems.

The first problem is that I do not expect to enter a humanities class without expecting to receive a wholeheartedly liberal education. If I take a class on the history of violence and aggression against American women, I expect to receive an education from the interpretation of a modern day liberal mind, marketed as ‘the truth’, and I do not think it is unreasonable to expect that that interpretation would be inherently biased towards one side of the story. If I then continue to get my degree in American history, I can expect my degree to be equivalent to a modern day liberal-minded mentality on American history. Meanwhile, I do this without any sort of conscious awareness that this is the case. I went through each class under the assumption that I was learning American history, not learning about one lens through which this history can be viewed. And because I now have a degree in American history, I am ‘licensed’ to teach history to others as if it were objective truth, without realizing that I only learned one side to history. In some ways, it is not very different from teaching science to students after having only read the Bible – you run the risk of teaching your own brand of Creationism and calling it ‘science’.

The second problem is that this lack of diversity in college campuses breeds something that, ironically, most college activists try to avoid: intolerance. An underrepresented number of Republican students and faculty is not a sign that Republican values are ‘wrong’, but it can (and does) serve to breed this perspective among college-educated students, thus further ostracizing those whom identify with Republican values. An inability to exercise those values in any college-educated environment leads to cookie-cutter perspectives in colleges, as well as a shunting of any and all disagreeing individuals, thus forcing them to find their niche elsewhere. As this niche usually ends up as an environment composed of individuals who were ostracized by the values of the ‘other party’, a self-reinforcing feedback loop of hatred against the perpetrators ensues, thus breeding further distance between the two political parties. Is this akin to the ‘Light Side’ versus the ‘Dark Side’, or is this a country of ‘good people’ versus a country of ‘good people’?

And what happens when other underrepresented belief systems are involved? If you are a Muslim immigrant, raised under the belief that your religion is what is right, and are forced into a country like America in which political leaders are resolute in their quest to make sure that you never enter in the first place on the basis of your beliefs, I see no reason why you wouldn’t see yourself as the Light Side fighting the Dark Side. Thus commence the Donald Trump / Darth Vader [comparison articles](http://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/18/donald-trump-darth-vader-comparison). And thus commence radicalized individuals and groups who program themselves to fight the opposition before engaging in analysis. After all, once the Dark Side has been defined, you’re losing valuable lives in the time it takes to analyze.

##The solution.
If you can look past your opinion of Star Wars (and your opinion of me) to understand the message here, I am hoping that you see the problem. If you see the problem, I am hoping that you are considering whether or not you are contributing to the problem. If you are, then you are engaging in analysis. If you are engaging in analysis, you have thus engaged in the process of weighing multiple perspectives against each other (your own, and mine) in order to reconcile the two. Doing this is ‘truth seeking’. If done well, you will not not shove aside the matter before a compromise has been reached between the two perspectives. Thus, a greater path to truth will be made known to you.

Now, if you continue to engage in analysis, you will replace your beliefs with truths. You will thus believe in the truth. The truth has no personal agenda, and seeks to harm no one. The only war it fights is the war against falsehood. It is the most literal ‘right and wrong’ that could possibly exist.

If you desire truth, you cease to desire power. If you cease to desire power, you also cease to desire the destruction of power against your beliefs. After all, if your beliefs are true, power won’t destroy them. If your beliefs are consistent, you’ve sought truth. Once you’ve sought truth, you stop seeing people as power-hungry structures and start seeing them as belief-holders people who seek to destroy power against their beliefs. Once you see them this way, you begin to resonate with them. Once you begin to resonate with them, you stop pushing against them, and instead have compassion for them. Once you have compassion for them, they stop seeing you as the enemy.

Once they stop seeing you as the enemy, they stop strengthening themselves by looking for and identifying your flaws and incompatibilities. Once they stop looking for your flaws, they begin to see what about you is good. They see a search for truth, a loyalty to what is just in all instances, not just your own political agenda. They begin to admire you. They take on your values. They begin to see the errors of their ways, or at least remain open to your careful revelation of these errors. Upon careful analysis, the reliance on the power of the country, the power of war, and the power of religion will all become things of the past – things that existed during a time in which truth didn’t reign, and power is what nations fought over. Over time, they begin to value the truth over power. This breeds harmony, because people no longer live in conflict. This breeds acceptance, because there is nothing unacceptable. This breeds love, because people are now relaxed enough to love. Is this not the end goal we all want?

There is a faster way to reach this end goal, but it is a bit more controversial: stop loving ‘your country’, and start loving the future that it could create. Let go of country-wide identification and begin to identify with problem solving. Focus on the skills and individual talents of your peers within your country. When you work alongside others for their talents and not for their beliefs, you have no reason to dislike them, because as varied and incompatible as beliefs could be, all talents are welcomed by all people. In the land of belief and value, differences are reasons to push back. In the land of talent and problem solving, differences are reasons to join together. The technical precision of the analyst may contradict the holistic, people-focus of the nurturer, but not when navigating the technical world of people. Their differing talents could solve problems or foresee solutions that neither could alone.

All of this boils down to the idea of considering the other side, at the expense of what your side is. In so doing, you seek the truth and let go of bias.

This is something that should be done. I can declare this as a truth in its own right, because I can see no perspective in which this is not regarded as truth: we should always be considering the perspectives of others. You can control groups of people through use of doctrine and power, but you cannot convince anyone of anything without showing them where their perspective falls short. Both control and conviction breed action, but only side acts because they know the truth; the other acts out of fear, or a desire for their own power.

And should a polarity between Light Side and Dark Side exist in our world, this may be it.
